Initial docs for active active (#29386)
akka/akka: akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/persistence-active-active.md

# Active-Active Event Sourcing

@@@ warning

This module is currently marked as @ref:[may change](../common/may-change.md) because it is a new feature that
needs feedback from real usage before finalizing the API. This means that API or semantics can change without
warning or deprecation period. It is also not recommended to use this module in production just yet.

@@@

> Event sourcing with `EventSourcedBehavior`s is based on the single writer principle, which means that there can only be one active instance of a `EventSourcedBehavior` with a given `persistenceId`. Otherwise, multiple instances would store interleaving events based on different states, and when these events would later be replayed it would not be possible to reconstruct the correct state.

Reviewer: Cross link to persistence doc page?

Author: 👍

This restriction means that in the event of network partitions, and for a short time during rolling re-deploys, `EventSourcedBehaviors`s are unavailable.

Active-active event sourcing enables running multiple replicas of each entity. 
There is automatic replication of every event persisted to all replicas.

For instance, a replica can be run per:

* Data Center 
* Availability zone or rack

The motivations are:

* Redundancy to tolerate failures in one location and still be operational
* Serve requests from a location near the user to provide better responsiveness
* Balance the load over many servers

However, the event handler must be able to **handle concurrent events** as when active-active is enabled

> there is no longer the single writer principal as there is with a normal `EventSourcedBehavior`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the single writer principle can't be enforced as it is with a normal `EventSourcedBehavior`.
```

Or am I missing the usage of the word `principal` here?

Author: nope that's right, i copied most of these

> 

Reviewer: mention eventual consistency somewhere in this section?

Author: 👍

> ## Relaxing the single writer principal for availability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Relaxing the single writer principle for availability
```

Here I'm sure it's about relaxing a principle instead of relaxing the principal. Maybe with a massage and a cocktail. 🍸

Author: hah

![images/replicated-events2.png](images/replicated-events2.png)

The event handler logic for applying events to the state of the entity must be aware of that such concurrent updates can occur and it must be modeled to handle such conflicts. This means that it should typically have the same characteristics as a Conflict Free Replicated Data Type (CRDT). With a CRDT there are by definition no conflicts and the events can just be applied. The library provides some general purpose CRDTs, but the logic of how to apply events can also be defined by an application specific function.

For example, sometimes it's enough to use application specific timestamps to decide which update should win.

To assist in implementing the event handler active-active detects these conflicts.

## API

The same API as regular `EventSourcedBehavior`s is used to define the logic. To enable an entity for active-active

> replication use the factory methods on @api[ActiveActiveEventSourcing]. 

Reviewer 2: `ActiveActiveEventSourcing` sounds weird, no? I thought we were leaning toward `ReplicatedEventSourcing`. Shall we reconsider it?

Author: Let's leave name discussion to another PR

All replicas need to be known up front:

Scala
:  @@snip [ActiveActiveCompileOnlySpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/ActiveActiveCompileOnlySpec.scala) { #replicas }

> Then to enable replication create the event sourced behavior with the factory method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then to enable replication, create the event sourced behavior with the factory method:
```

Scala

> :  @@snip [ActiveActiveCompileOnlySpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/ActiveActiveCompileOnlySpec.scala) { #factory-shared}

Reviewer: I think this is should come after the `apply`/`#factory` sample and say something like "In some circumstances, for example testing, it is easier to share a single journal for all replicas, then you can use this factory instead:"

Author: 👍

 
 In general, last writer wins means that the event is used if the timestamp of the event is later (higher) than the timestamp of previous local update, otherwise the event is discarded. There is no built-in support for last writer wins, because it must often be combined with more application specific aspects.
 
![images/lww.png](images/lww.png)

There is a small utility class @api[LwwTime] that can be useful for implementing last writer wins semantics.
It contains a timestamp representing current time when the event was persisted and an identifier of the
data center that persisted it. When comparing two @api[LwwTime] the greatest timestamp wins. The replica
identifier is used if the two timestamps are equal, and then the one from the data center sorted first in
alphanumeric order wins.

The nature of last writer wins means that if you only have one timestamp for the state the events must represent an
update of the full state, otherwise there is a risk that the state in different data centers will be different and

> not eventually converge to the same state.

Reviewer 2: I'm finding this sentence confusing. This needs to be re-phrased or maybe a comma is missing: 

_"if you only have one timestamp for the state the events must represent an update of the full state". Not clear to what._ 

We are also repeating 'the state' few times. For instance, the last part could omit it. 

_"..otherwise there is a risk that the state in different data centers will be different and will not eventually converge."_

Author: Removed the final state

Author: Any ideas to make the sentence more clear? It is then described via the example.

Reviewer 2: I will think on something.

In `DC-A` author is changed to "Bob" at time `100`. Before that event has been replicated over to `DC-B` the
title is updated to "Akka News" at time `101` in `DC-B`. When the events have been replicated the result will be:

`DC-A`: The title update is later so the event is used and new state is `title=Akka News, author=Bob`

`DC-B`: The author update is earlier so the event is discarded and state is `title=Akka News, author=unknown`

The problem here is that the partial update of the state is not applied on both sides, so the states have diverged and will not become the same.

To solve this with last writer wins the events must carry the full state, such as @scala[`AuthorChanged(newContent: PostContent)`]@java[`new AuthorChanged(newContent)`] and @scala[`TitleChanged(newContent: PostContent)`]@java[`new TitleChanged(newContent)`]. Then the result would eventually be `title=Akka News, author=unknown` on both sides.
The author update is lost but that is because the changes were performed concurrently. More important is that the state
is eventually consistent.

> Including the full state in each event is often not desired. An event typically represent a change, a delta. Then one can use several timestamps, one for each set of fields that can be updated together. In the above example one could use one timestamp for the title and another for the author. Then the events could represent changes to parts of the full state, such as @scala[`AuthorChanged(newAuthor: String)`]@java[`new AuthorChanged(newAuthor)`] and @scala[`TitleChanged(newTitle: String)`]@java[`new TitleChanged(newTitle)`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Including the full state in each event is often not desired. An event typically represent a change, a delta. Then one can use several timestamps, one for each set of fields that can be updated together. In the above example one could use one timestamp for the title and another for the author. Then the events could represent changes to deltas of the full state, such as @scala[`AuthorChanged(newAuthor: String)`]@java[`new AuthorChanged(newAuthor)`] and @scala[`TitleChanged(newTitle: String)`]@java[`new TitleChanged(newTitle)`].
```

Better to use the word `delta`. It the common term and it mentioned already before.

Diff is not showing the suggestion. It's in "Then the events could represent changes to deltas of the full state, such as .."

Reviewer 2: I personally found the blog example not great for a LWW. At least, not in the way we are using it.

We show that we will lose updates to them suggest that we should put the whole state in the event. Which again causes data loss, but at least guarantees eventual consistency. We finally mention that it's a bad idea to carry the whole state in the events (which is completely true).

Timestamp per field is a good approach and that's probably how people should do it in a blog post with LWW.

Author: "changes to the delta" doesn't that mean changes to the changes?

Author: I don't think the example is too important here, it is to get across the risks of LWW.

Reviewer 2: > "changes to the delta" doesn't that mean changes to the changes?

Correct, I will adapt the suggestion.

> I don't think the example is too important here, it is to get across the risks of LWW.

True, I see now that the goal of the example is to illustrate the risk.

Reviewer 2: is it better if we say:

"Then the events could represent the deltas of the full state..."

and otherwise will be detected via the `ActiveActiveContext` concurrent method.

For example:

```
DC-1: write e1
DC-2: read e1, write e2
DC-1: read e2, write e3
```

In the above example the causality is `e1 -> e2 -> e3`. Also in a third data center DC-3 these events will be read in the same order e1, e2, e3.

Another example with concurrent events:

```
DC1: write e1
DC2: read e1, write e2
DC1: write e3 (e2 and e3 are concurrent)
DC1: read e2
DC2: read e3
```

e2 and e3 are concurrent, i.e. they don't have a causal relation: DC1 sees them in the order "e1, e3, e2", while DC2 sees them as "e1, e2, e3".

A third data center may also see the events as either "e1, e3, e2" or as "e1, e2, e3".

### Concurrent updates

Active-active automatically tracks causality between events from different replias using [version vectors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_vector).

![images/causality.png](images/causality.png)

Each data center "owns" a slot in the version vector and increases its counter when an event is persisted. The version vector is stored with the event, and when a replicated event is consumed the version vector of the event is merged with the local version vector.

> When comparing two version vectors `v1` and `v2` get one of the following results:

Reviewer 2: Do mean: 

```suggestion
When comparing two version vectors `v1` and `v2` we can get one of the following results:
```
